Okay. Okay. We're rolling. Okay. I am very unknowledgeable about collectors, so
some of the questions I'm going to ask you are pretty basic. All right. That's
fine. I assume many of your listeners will be the same. Right. Exactly. Okay.
The first question is a pretty obvious one. Can you just briefly tell me how you
got started as a collector? Well, I guess we have to go back quite a ways. I got
interested in science fiction in high school, as many people do. And once I
started finding that, hey, out there in the big world, they have newsstands that
sell books, boy, I bought everything that I could get my hands on for many, many
years, and I really got started as a serious collector, however. I have my wife
to thank for that, and she sort of wishes she hadn't said it sometimes, I think,
because I was telling her about the books that I'd read when I was in high
school, which happened to be a series of hardcover juvenile science fiction
books published by the Winston Company, and how I'd been in love with those
things, had read them several times, and had fondled them a lot, and so on, and
she says, oh, there are used book dealers. They could probably find copies of
those, and you could buy them, and I hadn't even considered that In the past,
I'd only bought what I'd found at newsstands. And so when the time came and I
started sending these lists to all the dealers, well, they had all these other
fantastic books also. And it sort of mushroomed from there. Okay, good. Could
you tell me what kinds of things you concentrate on collecting? Well, I once
gave a talk on this subject, and I titled it The Complete Science Fiction
Collector, Confessions of a Pack Rat. In other words, I'm very, very versatile
and Catholic in my tastes. I don't like all kinds of things as much, equally,
but I collect anything that's published in the science fiction and fantasy vein,
I get my hands on, and then I can afford which means almost. I've got copies of
almost every book that's been published. Okay, and I'm not sure I still
understand that. I'm not sure if there's a term for this, but I'm talking about
categories like paperbacks, pulps, hardbacks, things of that sort. I started out
with paperbacks and the Digest magazines. I've gone back in terms of picking up
the old pulp magazines to the point where now I have almost all of them that
were ever published, starting back with Weird Tales in 1923 and Amazing Stories
in 1926. I'm very proud of my complete collection of weird tales since I
understand there's only about 30 copies or so in existence and just about as
good on astounding science fiction, for example. Recently, I have been branching
out into hardbacks also, but I'm a long, long ways from complete on that. What
about this plain old paperback? Well, I have about 14,000, 15,000. Is that
enough for you? Yeah. Do you try to pick up all of those, or do you just take
certain kinds? There's always a problem in making the, where do you draw the
line? But I basically get everything that's clearly science fiction, everything
that's clearly fantasy. I kind of draw the line someplace in the horror vein to
one side and maybe fairy tales on the other side, And sometimes I'll draw the
line at, you know, an Adam Baum story that's in the near future or something
like that. But basically, I get every paper bag in science fiction and fantasy.
In multiple editions, I might say, every time a new cover comes out, why I'll
buy the new edition. Okay. Now, this question is really going to show my
ignorance, but how do you accumulate your books? Do you go about it by cold,
methodical planning and then go right to the publisher, or do you just search
around bookstores? How do you go about that? No, I buy most of mine these days
used. I'll buy the ones I like better, new, so that I have a mint copy on
paperbacks especially. But an awful lot of them I buy them used. They're fairly
recent, just in the local bookstores. Lubbock is blessed with about seven or
eight, so I make the rounds on a regular basis and just pick up whatever I
happen to come across. Sooner or later, I find most everything in the recent
things. And on older things, I go through mail-order dealers. Okay, then you, I
assume, and I know through Bill that there are publications and so forth. I
mean, do you, how do you know how much is coming out? Do you have some kind of
checklist? The best source by far is the news magazine of science fiction called
Locus. and Science Fiction Chronicle also has these sort of things. They attempt
to list every book that comes out in the field. In fact, they're even wider in
their categories than I am and they include academic-type books and things like
this, too. And every month they will list everything that's come out by every
publisher. Most of the publishers send them copies and the ones that don't, they
still will write down there that they know this book exists, that they haven't
seen a copy. They also give mini-reviews on many of them. And I assume for the—I
call it Pulps. I'm not sure what the term is. I assume for those, you just have
subscriptions? There are no pulp magazines that have been published since 1955
or so. They sort of went the way of the dinosaurs. But their successors are the
Digest-sized magazines, as well as such large, oversized ones as Omni
and Twilight Zone, currently. And so I buy those on the newsstands every month.
Okay. Do you ever run across any valuable finds or little nuggets just by
accident, just browsing around? Not as many as I would like. Occasionally I do I
pick up quite a few You know moderately rare things Say for example For half a
cover price At a used bookstore But that's getting to be more and more rare As
the collectors have got all the valuable things Grabbed up Most of them I have
to pay More or less market value Actually one other source I didn't mention For
many of my books Because I buy so many I'll actually buy a person's entire
collection just to get the books that I especially want if there's some older,
rarer ones among them. I assume, then, you have a complete set of the Ace
Doubles? Actually, I'm still missing one that's been rather elusive. But other
than that, I have all the Ace Doubles, yeah. Is that D13? I have a D13. Yes, I
do. I was very lucky to get that before the prices started escalating as much as
they have. And I got it from one of the major dealers, and I paid what now,
three or four years later, would seem to be a real steal. Okay, what about
traveling? Do you ever travel just to make collecting trips? No, I combine
collecting trips with whenever I happen to be traveling. I remember one time,
not too long ago, we visited relatives in Madison, Wisconsin, and I had to mail
all the books back because there wasn't room in the rabbit for the family in the
books. And my wife said, no way are we going to sit in here with several boxes
of books. But I don't make deliberate trips just to buy things. Okay. Are you a
reader and a fan of science fiction first and then a collector, or are you in
the field principally for collecting? Yeah, people keep asking me that. How much
of this stuff do you read? Well, the answer is as much as I have time for, which
in my rather busy schedule is between 50 and 70 books a year, I estimate. And
I'll probably add 1,000 to the collection in a year, so I certainly don't read a
very big percentage. But I pick and choose among what I've got. Since I have
less hardbacks, and since they cost more in general, I feel some sort of a semi
-obligation to try to read something if I bought in hardback. okay I'm sure
you're asked this question from people who know that you're a collector just
from a psychological point of view why do you collect because it's there that's
that's actually I suppose a difficult question for anyone to answer first of all
you have to love books or whatever you're collecting this is the collector's
mania there's lots of people that collect anything from match books to old Avon
bottles, for heaven's sakes, and I collect what I enjoy from other standpoints.
I enjoy the artwork on them, I enjoy reading the things, I like to read at least
the representative's book by any author that's important in the field and so on,
and I just love books. I love to handle them, I love to sort them, catalog them,
put them away, just look at them, and that's what I do Well, the fair portion of
my spare time, I guess.
There's one more aspect to this. If you really get the collecting bug, and that
is the completist attitude. That is, for example, you decide you want to collect
something. I don't care what it is, but let's say it's the Ace Doubles. You use
that as an example. A lot of people have gone after them, for example, so the
prices are going up. But once you decide you want to get the Ace Doubles, you
don't care which ones are good ones and which ones are bad ones in terms of the
story. All you're concerned about is getting a copy of every one. And that same
thing goes especially for people that collect the magazines because there it's
pretty obvious whether you've got them all because they're all nicely laid out
by Mucs. Okay, I think you sort of halfway answered this one a minute ago. If
you think, if you would just repeat yourself, go ahead and tell me, and I won't
ask this, but I asked you, why do you collect? Why science fiction books? Why
not something else, like mysteries or westerns or seashells or something?
Because I love science fiction. Something we haven't gotten into the
conversation yet is, here at Texas Tech, I also am involved in helping the team
teach the course in science fiction. We have a special course through our honors
program, and there are three or four of us every semester. The team teaches this
thing to a small group, and we try to teach some principles about writing also,
so there's a creative writing for us, very much a discussion for us, and so on.
I just love science fiction. I don't mind reading an occasional mystery, let's
say. I haven't read a Western in 20 years, but I've read lots of science
fiction. That's what I like to read, that's what I like to collect. Also, I
might say that many of the older science fiction books are more valuable to
collectors in general than many of those in other fields, say, comparable age,
probably sure. Okay, you also sort of answered this one a minute ago, too. But
let me ask you, let's say with the books that you've collected sometimes, let's
say your collection of weird tales or something, what do you do with those
books? Do you take them out and read them or handle them or what? I handle them
to the extent of cataloging them. I have a very extensive catalog system, as you
might guess. I'll look at them occasionally. On the weird tales, especially in a
few things like this, I have people that I correspond with other collectors and
so on, and some of them who can't afford to spend several hundred dollars for
some of the early issues, let's say, and might want to read some story that's
never been reproduced or something like that, I'll actually make a photocopy of
it for them for my expenses and time. And that's one thing I do with some of
them. Okay. And you must be fairly knowledgeable about other collectors and the
sources and so forth. Are there people who collect the science fiction books
simply because it's, oh, I don't know, because it's just something to collect,
maybe you're not fans who don't care anything about science fiction? Maybe as an
investment, let's say? Yeah. well, my advice to somebody who wants to do that is
you've got to know a heck of a lot about this field before you're likely to be
very successful at it, going about it from that standpoint. Because just because
something is old doesn't necessarily mean that it's especially valuable. And
what would be really difficult from the investor's standpoint, from somebody who
knew very little about the field is to know which books to pick up now, because
10 years from now, they're going to be worth a lot. In fact, that's kind of hard
for me to guess, and I certainly know more about it than a lot of people do.
Well, you're not in it for the investment, are you? No, I'm not, but I'm
thinking about comic book collectors especially. There's a heck of a lot of
people in that field, while many of the most fanatical ones clearly love comic
books, there are people that see this fantastic way that the prices go up on
those things and want to buy them just as an investment. In fact, the paperback
books are kind of getting in that category to an extent because they are
publishing price guides for them now, and they hadn't done that until very
recently. In your particular line of collecting, what is considered the
ultimate? the ultimate I'd say the rarest item I've got is my volume one, number
one, Weird Tales
but there are well, it depends on what you're talking about, for example here's
an example a lot of people would know about, Frank Herbert's Dune, hardcover the
first edition is worth a great deal of money, simply because June wasn't that
well known when it first came out. Didn't attract that much attention until
slowly over several years. And that first hardcover edition is extremely hard to
find. So that in good condition, I understand that a first edition is worth a
thousand bucks. Well, I don't have a copy of it. I wouldn't mind having a copy
at all, although I wouldn't pay that money for it. But I know somebody who found
one in the garage sale in Lubbock. And it bugs the heck out of me. It wasn't me.
How much can a really valuable single paperback cost? Well, I can tell you the
highest price I've heard anybody charge for anything, and that was, and I don't
know that they got it, but this was the asking price, was $175 for Cat and the
Canary House by Kurt Vonnegut. And that book, which is his only collection of
short stories and which are all unabashedly science fiction, he vows he'll never
allow reprinted as long as he lives, and there aren't all that many copies
available, so the price of that thing has been really escalating. I got my copy
for $3, I don't mind telling you. What's the most you paid for a paperback? I
think about $20. And I don't do that for very many, I assure you. By the way,
this isn't a... formal question but do you happen to have a paperback copy of
the Hillman edition of The Dying Earth, the first paperback? No, as a matter of
fact that's another one that I could have mentioned that's in that pretty good
category and Jack Vance in general is a very collectible person and I've got
everything that's, say, relatively accessible but I don't have something like
that. I do have his first card back by the way, Vandals of the Void that a lot
of people wouldn't mind having that. Yeah, okay. One thing that I wonder about
with paperback and digest collectors like yourself seems to me that paperbacks
don't last an awfully long time. How do you store and preserve them for the
future? That's a very good question. First of all, they're going to deteriorate
no matter what you do. You can slow it down. Here in Lubbock, my stuff is
descubering down a basement, and the temperature stays fairly constant, and the
humidity is relatively low, and it's not too far from ideal book storage
conditions just automatically. The rare things, especially, I do put in plastic
bags, and I also have access to, my wife is a librarian up at Texas Tech, and so
I have access to her. She's actually the one who does the book repairs, among
other things, and all the prepping of books, that sort of thing. So I have
access to her facilities for repairing things. If I have a copy glue that say
the glue is coming out, I can reglue it with good grade library glue. And I've
gotten pretty good at making repairs that are fairly unnoticeable. And I can
make a pretty beat up looking copy look halfway decent. That's a lot better to
have one that you don't have to do that. If I had a really rare one, I would
simply put it in the bag and not touch it anymore and hope it won't crumble. I
suppose for something you're buying that's an older copy, no matter what it is,
the value is mostly dependent on the condition it's in? The condition is
extremely important, yes. You can have a rare book that's in perfect condition
and expect to pay anywhere from two to ten times as much as a poorer copy.
Because many of the real serious collectors are condition freaks. they won't
accept one unless it's just in pretty darn nice shape. And something that's
been, you know, read and passed around and survived through several trips to the
used bookstore certainly isn't in that condition. You pretty much have to get
one that was a one-owner book. Okay, do you have any particular goals at this
time rather than just keep, you know, adding on the new books that are coming
out? Is there any particular thing you're aiming at? Not really, which is one
reason, too, why, you know, the fact that I don't have Vans Is Dying Earth, just
to take as an example, sure, I would like to get a copy, and hopefully I'll run
across, be in the right place at the right time on Monday, but I'm not pursuing
it fanatically. If I really said I've got to have that book no matter what, and
I'm willing to pay the price and write to every dealer in the country that I can
find the name for, somebody would come up with a copy, sure. But since I'm so
widespread, anything I don't get at any particular time, I assume, well, there's
a fair chance I'll get it later. And certainly I have the dying earth in umpteen
other editions, to take that as an example. And I've read it, you know, so it
would be nice to have that first edition. But there's an awful lot of things
that I don't have, even then, and I'll never have everything, so what the heck.
Is there any particular item that you especially covet?
I don't really know. I could make a short list of a dozen that would be highest
priority in terms of this is what I pay the most money for. Some of Philip H.
Farmer's rarest books, the advanced ones, these guys are both highly collectible
anyway and there'd be a few others. Would you sell your collection or any
portion of it for a high enough price? Probably not now. I do know somebody who
retired and took a round-the-world trip on selling his.
Where would the greatest collections of science fiction material of your type in
existence be? Oh, that's easy. Morris J. Ackerman was sort of a number one fan.
He's a pretty old man now, but he has been active in the field for, I don't
know, well over 50 years, and he has repeatedly bought everything, including all
kinds of knickknacks and toys and first edition paintings and just literally
over 100,000 pieces, I understand, which is all in a, he's donated it to, gee, I
forgot one, one of the California cities, San Francisco, I think. But anyway, it
is reputed to be by far the most fantastic collection that's ever been put
together. By the way, there are some libraries now, academic-type libraries and
others, who have extremely good collections of science fiction. within Texas,
for example, A&M has a special collection that's I don't think has as many
pieces but probably has more value than my collection. I know they have a
complete set of weird tales, for example. Yeah, we managed to talk to Forrest
Ackerman, interviewed him in person at the Denvention too, a couple years ago.
So I think I knew the answer to that before I asked you. Right, that's all
right. Not everybody listening to you well. Yeah. Is there any kind of, I don't
know, association, group, publications, etc., that go along with the collecting
business? Not that I know of specifically for science fiction. There have been
several little amateur publications with titles like Paperback Quarterly, for
example, that have to do with collecting paperbacks exclusively. Mostly what you
have is, well, there are various kinds of guides, of course, and indexes. Other
than that, you just get catalogs from dealers and start looking around. Would
you have any advice for a beginner, somebody who loved science fiction, but had
not collected anything who wanted to start? Okay. Probably what most people will
do when they start is they will pick a favorite author or authors and try to get
all the books by that person. somebody with a limited budget just starting
think, you know, that's a pretty good first step to say, for example, get a copy
of some edition of every book that Robert A. Heinlein has written or Andre
Norton or you name it, whoever the person happens to like. And once they do that
and if they start getting the collecting bug, then pretty soon they'll want to
trade in those later printings for first editions, and then if they've really
gotten into it, they'll want to trade in those beat-up first editions for better
copies for the first editions when they do it, and they'll probably start
expanding into other authors, or some people will do it in terms of, say, for
example, a specific publisher trying to get everything. Or in the case of the
magazines, as I say, that's easy. They might start with, let's say, Astounding
Analog or Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction or something like that or
Amazing Stories, whatever. and maybe branch out as much as their time, money,
and inclination allow them to.
I understand from Bill that you'd also sell a little bit. If you decided to do
that as a living, is it possible to make a living off of it? Not without one
heck of a lot of time and effort. I basically, and what I'm doing is selling off
duplicates that I wind up with, either from buying people's collections or from,
if I find a really rare book, even if I have it, I'll pick it up if it's cheap,
and also, you know, when I buy a full collection, there'll be lots of duplicates
in there. Or I just buy something just to upgrade my copy, because I did, there
was many years there when I wasn't trusty about condition, I'm getting more and
more so myself, and so I'm still weeding out beat-up copies and putting better
copies in the places. but it's a part-time on-the-side type thing I do send out.
I have a small list of people that are on a mailing list that get an occasional
catalog I put out or some people send me one list and if I have duplicates I'll
tell them, hey, I got this and be able to sell it to cheaper than other people.
Okay, I just have a couple more, John. Let's see, how should I put this one?
like what's going to happen in the future I assume you're going to be collecting
for most of the rest of your life what do you think is going to happen to your
collection do you have any plans I'll tell you one thing I'd hate to think about
moving but other than that my wife has talked about that briefly a little bit
once in a while I would expect something unexpected happens sometime after
retirement I'll probably be interested in selling off at least most of it. But
that's a long ways down the road. She said, donate it to some library. Well, if
she's left with the decision, she does what she wants. But I would want to
recoup some of the things, some of what we got into it. Okay, I think you
answered this one a little earlier, partially. But let me, as I wind down, just
do one more try at it. What part of your collection are you, say, you're the
most proud of? my pulp magazines I think is sort of my own favorite among all
the things people come into the house visitors that know nothing about science
fiction I always trot them downstairs and show them the collection kind of funny
to watch somebody you hand them one of those old pulp magazines give them one
that isn't crumbling too badly and then they start looking at all the old ads
from the 30's or whatever it's kind of a history lesson just to go through the
things if they don't know the stories or care about that, that's especially why
they find the ads more fascinating than anything. But I started out, in terms of
serious collecting, with the magazine and The Pulse especially. And those early
ones especially are, there just aren't very many copies around, and so that's
kind of my favorite part of the collection.
What kind of reactions do you get from people when they first get to know you
and find out that you collect like this? Do they think you're pretty weird? Most
of them are at least polite.
Actually, it's fairly well known around here because a couple of years ago, the
wire services got a hold of it, and I was interviewed, and there were write-ups
and papers all over the state. And I just learned the other day there was
actually one in Lincoln, Nebraska, and I don't know where else, as well as I
appeared on local television, and a few other things. So I don't make any big
secret about it, at least. So some people know of my reputation, or they'll say,
oh, you mean you're the guy with all those books.
Is there any way for you to tell how you, I don't know, I'm sure how to put
this, how you rank or how your collection stacks up against some of the other
collectors around the country? Not really. I have corresponded with a fair
amount of collectors, and I know if I think about it, I could probably put
together a dozen names or so of ones who probably have at least comparable size
collections.
Except possibly for some in some libraries, I doubt there are very many that are
bigger. I have no real way to know that, because I don't go to conventions
around the country and things like that. so I meet some of these people by
letter but I don't know at least not very many of them do that one thing I do of
collecting multiple editions of the same book yeah this is another one that's
sort of off the record but I'm a Lord of the Rings bug you know Tolkien fan and
I recently found a set of the Ace Lord of the Rings books in paperback are they
worth much Depending on condition, I think that the market price for a nice copy
is probably in the range of $10. $10 each. Yeah, I'm not sure. I haven't really
seen anybody list one very recently. It could be more. That's what I paid, $10
each, and they were in good condition. What? That was a pretty good estimate on
your part. Okay.
Well listen John is there like I said I don't know a great deal about collecting
so Well I was wondering is there any area or anything you'd like to say or stuff
that I'm missing or I think we've pretty much covered the waterfront as far as I
can tell Yeah I would say so we do have some things in common I'm a teacher here
at Odessa College I teach English Oh uh huh But David and I do team teach a
science fiction class Oh yeah Right That's right I'm So maybe sometime in the
future I might get back to you. We could just do a show or two on just teaching
science fiction, something like that. Oh, okay. Our own approach is probably
semi-genique, anyway. At least it isn't like any of them that I've seen syllabus
on. Syllabi? Whatever it is. Yeah.
Well, John, that's about all I can think of. We obviously will send you the
tapes when the shows are edited. Oh, okay. Great. David, is there anything you
want to ask me? No. I think I covered it pretty much. You talked about
collecting a series or something like that? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Hey, John. Yeah.
Do you know, this is off of the record, too. Do you know anybody who's got a
copy of Zelazny's Guns of Avalon, first edition hardcover? No, I don't. Not in
hardcover. Yeah. I understand that it's pretty hard to get a hold of. It's not
near as hard as Nine Princes. Okay, I got the wrong one then. Oh, I see. I don't
have anything except the book club edition. okay I'm just starting into
hardbacks really and I don't have all that much that's rare and I certainly
don't have duplicate copies okay well listen John we appreciate your time maybe
some one of these days I'll get to meet you if we come to some local convention
up there or something right well hopefully we'll have a convention here again
next year yeah okay thank you very much then John we'll get these tapes to you
as soon as they're done okay great goodbye bye bye